in this easy eight video lecture we will
learn about field effect transistors
types of Fe T construction working and
the characteristics of J FET
construction working and the
characteristics of MOSFET and the
application of the MOSFET as a switch
field effect transistor abbreviated as
fut is a unipolar device meaning that
current conduction takes place only due
to one type of carrier this is the major
difference between the BJT and the FE T
as the BJT conduction of current takes
place due to the both electrons and
holes
the advantages of fe t and BJT are high
input impedance Fe T is a voltage
control device it provides high degree
of isolation between the input and the
output less noisy etc
f it is our mainly of two types Junction
field effect transistor or J FET and
metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect
transistor or MOSFET
Junction field effect transistor was
first described by Shockley in 1952 J
FET is a 4 terminal device with the
terminal names as gate drain and source
the four terminal called as the body
terminal is always connected to the
source there are two types of gfitz as
an n-channel jfet and a p-channel jf8
thus we represent only three terminals
in a symbol of Japheth
let's start with the construction of
n-channel jfet the name n-channel
signifies that here electrons are the
majority charge carriers to form the
n-channel jfet we take n-type
semiconductor as the base and drop it
with a p-type semiconductor at both the
ends
both these P regions are electrically
connected to each other and an ohmic
contact is taken out of which is called
as the gate two more terminals are taken
out from n substrate and are called as
source and the drain the surge a FET has
three terminals source and drain and
gate similar to BJT jf8 also has two PN
junctions
for constructing a p-channel jf8 we take
a piece of straight and dope n-type
semiconductors at the two ends to form
the gate thus the two types of gfitz are
constructed as shown
hey it's time to concentrate now moving
forward towards the working net spies
the J effete with the two voltage
sources one between the gate and the
source as vgs and the second between the
drain and the source as VDS the source
acts as a common terminal initially as
no voltage is applied the depletion
region is formed across the two PN
junctions
being of n-type the drain-to-source
channel contains electrons as majority
charge carriers application of the small
drain to source voltage makes these
electrons flow from the source to the
drain as the positive voltage at the
drain attracts them thus the drain
current flows through the Jay FET from
the drain to the source now let's keep
the VDS constant and apply some gate to
the source voltage
P region contains holes applying the
negative voltage to the gate makes the
PN Junction reverse biased the depletion
region width increases and it penetrates
more deeply into the channel decreasing
the channel width and thus the drain
current reduces
now if we increase the gate voltage
towards a more negative side the
depletion region goes on increasing and
a point comes when the channel gets
depleted completely the value of vgs is
called as the pinch of voltage or
threshold voltage at this point the
current flows stop now let's keep the
vgs voltage constant written between
zero volts and the pinch off value and
increase the VDS voltage VDS is nothing
but the voltage drop across the channel
which increases as we move towards the
drain also the reverse bias voltage of
VG s is the highest at the drain
thus the depletion region gets a tapered
shape near the drain and channel becomes
much narrower in this case thus I D
remains constant and the characteristic
graph becomes nonlinear
now studying all the cases you may have
a question that why vgs is never
positive gate voltage primary controls
the flow of the drain current if we
apply vgs positive this will make the PN
Junction forward biased and the gate
sees this to control the current flow
thus we never apply a voltage above zero
volts to the gate terminal the synergy
FET the output current ID is controlled
by the input voltage vgs thus fe t is a
voltage control device whereas BJT is a
current control device
the characteristics of japheth are as
shown in the figure
the metal-oxide-semiconductor
field-effect transistor or simply mosfet
is the cousin of jfn as the boat exhibit
the same nature of F ETS MOSFET is also
divided in two types such as enhancement
and depletion type
seriously pay attention this is
important
MOSFET has also four terminals as gate
drain source and body but the body
terminal is always connected to the
source so the MOSFET is considered as a
three terminal device
so let's see the construction of the
mosfet now to construct an n-channel
MOSFET p-type semiconductor structure is
considered as the base or substrate then
we dope to n-type wells to obtain the
source and the drain terminals which
form the required end channel between
the two thus we get the MOSFET structure
as shown
the symbols of Jeff ed and MOSFET are
almost the same except that there is a
dotted line between gate and the other
two terminals in MOSFET this is because
in the MOSFET the gate terminal is kept
isolated from the drain and the source
with the help of an oxide layer and the
metal is used to make the contact
terminal
thus this device is named as the metal
oxide semiconductor field effect
transistor
moving forward let's start with the
working of MOSFET let's consider that
vgs and VDS is equal to zero volts the
mosfet remains stable but depletion
region is formed due to PN Junction as
shown now let's apply the positive vgs
as shown as the positive voltage is
applied to the gate terminal holes near
the gate are repelled towards the
substrate hence mosfet operates in the
cutoff mode
when we increase the gate voltage about
a threshold value all holes get depleted
from the depletion region and the gate
attracts all the minority charge
carriers this forms the inversion layer
near the gate which contains only
electrons this layer acts as a channel
and as it contains only electrons it is
called as the end channel as this
channel enhances due to increase in the
gate voltage this Fe T is called
enhancement type MOSFET
now let's apply a positive voltage to
the drain which is n-type when we apply
positive potential to the drain the
depletion region near the drain widens
due to reverse biased PN Junction
as we increase the strain voltage above
the gate voltage applied electrons from
the channel field a strong force of
attraction towards the drain and start
flowing from the source to the drain
through the channel this motion
generates the drain current which flows
from the drain to the source increasing
the VDS further we reach a point where
this channel width starts to decrease at
the drain terminal and the channel gets
tapered and is transformed into a single
point after this point even if we
increase the VDS ID remains constant
after this point MOSFET goes into a
saturation mode
thus we can summarize the working of the
MOSFET in the following table
when it is in the cutoff mode or
saturation mode it acts as a switch and
when it is in the active region it acts
as an amplifier
thus we observe the following
characteristics for the enhancement
MOSFET
now let's focus on the applications of
the MOSFET same as the BJT MOSFET can
also be used as a switch now this
operation of the MOSFET solely depends
upon the vgs voltage provided voltage
VDS between the drain and the source is
positive ends mosfet is called as
voltage controlled current source
when vgs is equal to zero no channel is
formed
thus mosfet acts as an open switch and
the bulb remains off and when vgs is
increased above the threshold voltage a
channel is formed between the drain and
the source and the flow of the current
starts thus mosfet acts as a closed
switch and the bulb glows
let us now review what we've learned in
this video lecture field effect
transistors are of two types J fads and
MOSFETs the G FET are further divided
into n channel J fat and p channel g fat
whereas the MOSFETs are the enhancement
type and the depletion type for n
channel J fed to P regions are doped
into the N substrate as shown the gate
is taken out from the P region and the
source and the drain are taken out from
the n substrate for P channel jf8 the
base is of p-type and the end regions
are doped along its two sides the gate
is taken out from n-type base and the
source and the drain terminals are taken
out from the P regions applications of
the positive VD a starts the current
flow keeping VG s constant increase in
the VDS increases the drain current ID
linearly and then the Contra means
constant
keeping the VDS positive and constant
application of the negative vgs reduces
the channel width the channel becomes
narrow and at pinch off point the
current flow stops for constructing an N
channel MOSFET - n wells are doped onto
the p-type substrate or base the gate
terminal is taken out from p-type the
source and the drain are taken from n
Wells and the body terminal is connected
to the source the gate is isolated from
the body by using sio2 oxide layer
application of the positive gate voltage
vgs repels the holes from the p-type and
attracts the minority electrons from the
base these electrons form a channel as
shown a VDS voltage greater than VG's
voltage when applied attracts the
electrons and constitutes the drain
current
further increase in the VDS leads the
pinch of point where the current ceases
to flow
MOSFET is used as a switch when operated
in the cutoff region it acts as an open
switch when operated in saturation it
acts as a closed switch and in the
active region it acts as an amplifier